---
layout: post
title: Welcome to the Mothership
date: '2011-07-12T08:00:05-04:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: http://tech.gilt.com/post/7530657920/mothership
---
In  the summer of 2010, our Ops team was tasked with migrating our  production systems from one hosting platform to another and immediately  began to take stock of the challenges presented by our tools and  processes. At Gilt, we make extensive use of both Cobbler and Puppet for  our provisioning and configuration management, respectively. Configuration  management software like Puppet is awesome, but manually configuring  nodes and maintaining the relationships between nodes and classes can  quickly become overwhelming. System  provisioning software like Cobbler, while similarly awesome, doesn’t  really know what to do with servers once the OS is installed.Neither software package helps you track your hardware inventory, manage users, or monitor the health of your systems. So,  here we are, with a handful of software packages and a team of Systems  Engineers with one common goal: take a bunch of boxes filled with computer parts and turn them into fully-configured, usable, monitored  production servers. Being UNIX/Linux guys, we figured stitching  together stable single-purpose programs was preferable to reinventing  the wheel and cramming a bunch of disparate functionality into a single  software package. Enter Mothership.Mothership  is a modular, database-driven server provisioning and management system  written in python. We’ve currently got modules for interaction with and  management of: Puppet, Cobbler, LDAP, SSH, Zabbix, Zenoss, Citrix  Xenserver, Dell’s DRACs, user accounts, and DNS.Mothership  is also open source. For more information, to try out the alpha, or to  help develop it, check out: http://mothership.sourceforge.net
