--- 
layout: post 
title: Voluntary Adoption in Action: HBC Digital Adopts Slack
author: Adrian Trenaman  
date: '2017-02-02' 
categories: leadership 
tags:
- leadership
- organisation 
- chat solutions 
- voluntary adoption 
- culture 
- hipchat
- slack 
---

## Musings on Decentralised Control and Voluntary Adoption in Large Organisations.


When I think of Slack, I think first of the great [book](https://www.amazon.com
/Slack-Getting-Burnout-Busywork-Efficiency/dp/0767907698) by Tom DeMarco on the
organisational "slack" we need to play, innovate, get big things done. It’s an
amazing read, and I recommend without reservation. More recently, when I think
of Slack, I think of the massive grassroots movement at HBC Digital that
switched us from HipChat to Slack in just a few short weeks, without any top-
down edict or stop-the-world migration.  We have this core value in Tech called
‘voluntary adoption’: if a technology, framework, tool or service is really good
then your teams will adopt it naturally, without coercion. The corollary of
voluntary adoption is that if you find that you’re having to push a solution on
a group of people and they’re resisting, pushing back, or not getting it, then
it’s a good sign that the solution might not be as good as you previously
thought.

Through merger and acquisition, we found ourselves in a position with multiple
tech teams using different chat solutions, creating artificial divisions and
cross-team awkwardness. We could have mandated a move to one of the incumbent
chat solutions at HBC and dragged everyone across the divide: a solution that
would have been a long hard march. Instead, we looked about at the current most-
loved tool, Slack, and kicked off a couple of channels and invited some folk in
and said, "hey, try it out." Within days we encountered some interesting
effects: first, folks loved it; and second, they wanted clarity to know if
everyone could just move there together. Without having to force or coerce
anyone, we’re now all together on one system: Slack.

So what do we learn from this application of voluntary adoption? First, we got
the outcome we wanted, fast, and it stuck. Second, but perhaps more
interestingly, was that we traded off one kind of organisational stress for
another. Top down, authoritative control offers clarity and a sense of control,
and the expense of individual choice. “Everyone, we’re using Tool X" has a
clarity, but smart folk quickly reject being told to use a tool they don’t like
and that leads to stress and angst. “Everyone, we don’t have an agreed standard
yet so why not try this as well as the current solutions?” feels rudderless and
perhaps somewhat chaotic for those in the midst of it: adoptees are confused and
wonder which one to choose. However, this approach unleashes a Darwinian process
of natural selection: a decentralised, collaborative optimisation process that
will either squash a bad idea up front or elevate a good idea into something
grand.

We apply voluntary adoption at multiple levels - in our open-source offerings,
internal libraries, tools, and how we work together as teams - and the
ramifications for voluntary adoption for us as engineers and product innovators
are profound. If you’re going to invest time into building something, spend time
on making it a dream for the newcomer: easy to use, surprising, delighting.
Think: you are not in a position to force your solution on someone: but you can
make your solution something that’s a dream to adopt. Voluntarily.
